The following is a conversation with Lee Smolin.
He's a theoretical physicist,
coinventor of loop quantum gravity,
and a contributor of many interesting ideas
to cosmology, quantum field theory,
the foundations of quantum mechanics,
theoretical biology, and the philosophy of science.
He's the author of several books,
including one that critiques the state of physics
and string theory called The Trouble with Physics.
In his latest book, Einstein's Unfinished Revolution,
The Search for What Lies Beyond the Quantum.
He's an outspoken personality in the public debates
on the nature of our universe,
among the top minds in the theoretical physics community.
This community has its respected academics,
its naked emperors, its outcasts and its revolutionaries,
its madmen, and its dreamers.
This is why it's an exciting world to explore
through a long form conversation.
I recommend you listen back to the episodes
of Leonard Susskind, Sean Carroll, Michio Akaku,
Max Stegmark, Eric Weinstein, and Jim Gates.
You might be asking, why talk to physicists
if you're interested in AI?
To me, creating artificial intelligence systems
requires more than Python and deep learning.
It requires that we return to exploring
the fundamental nature of the universe
and the human mind.
Theoretical physicists venture out into the dark,
mysterious, psychologically challenging place
of first principles,
more than almost any other discipline.
This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast.
If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube,
give it five stars on Apple Podcast,
support it on Patreon,
or simply connect with me on Twitter.
Alex Friedman, spelled F R I D M A N.
As usual, I'll do one or two minutes of ads now
and never any ads in the middle
that can break the flow of the conversation.
I hope that works for you
and doesn't hurt the listening experience.
This show is presented by Cash App,
the number one finance app in the App Store.
When you get it, use code LEX Podcast.
Cash App lets you send money to friends, buy Bitcoin,
and invest in the stock market with as little as $1.
Since Cash App allows you to buy Bitcoin,
let me mention that cryptocurrency
in the context of the history of money is fascinating.
I recommend Ascent of Money as a great book on this history.
Debits and credits on ledgers started around
30,000 years ago.
The US dollar, of course, created over 200 years ago,
and Bitcoin, the first decentralized cryptocurrency,
was released just over 10 years ago.
So given that history,
cryptocurrency is still very much
in its early days of development,
but it still is aiming to
and just might redefine the nature of money.
If you get Cash App from the App Store or Google Play
and use the code LEX Podcast,
you'll get $10,
and Cash App will also donate $10 to first,
one of my favorite organizations
that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education
for young people around the world.
And now, here's my conversation with Lee Smolin.
What is real?
Let's start with an easy question.
Put it another way.
How do we know what is real
and what is merely a creation
of our human perception and imagination?
We don't know.
We don't know. This is science.
I presume we're talking about science.
And we believe, or I believe,
that there is a world that is independent of my existence
and my experience about it and my knowledge of it.
And this I call the real world.
So you said science, but even bigger than science.
Sure, sure.
I need not have said this is science.
I just was warming up.
Warming up.
Okay, now that we warmed up,
let's take a brief step outside of science.
Is it completely a crazy idea to you
that everything that exists
is merely a creation of our mind?
So like, there's a few, not many,
this is outside of science now.
People who believe sort of perception
is fundamentally what's in our human perception,
the visual cortex and so on,
the cognitive constructs that's being formed there
is the reality.
And then anything outside
is something that we can never really grasp.
Is that a crazy idea to you?
There's a version of that that is not crazy at all.
What we experience is constructed by our brains
and by our brains in an active mode.
So we don't see the raw world.
We see a very processed world.
We feel something was very processed through our brains
and our brains are incredible.
But I still believe that behind that experience,
that mirror or veil or whatever you wanna call it,
there is a real world and I'm curious about it.
Can we truly, how do we get a sense of that real world?
Is it through the tools of physics
from theory to the experiments?
Or can we actually grasp it in some intuitive way
that's more connected to our ape ancestors?
Or is it still fundamentally the tools of math and physics
that really allow us to grasp it?
Let's talk about what tools they are.
What you say are the tools of math and physics.
I mean, I think we're in the same position
as our ancestors in the caves
or before the caves or whatever.
We find ourselves in this world and we're curious.
We also, it's important to be able to explain what happens
when there are fires, when there are not fires,
what animals and plants are good to eat
and all that stuff.
But we're also just curious.
We look up in the sky and we see the sun and the moon
and the stars and we see some of those move
and we're very curious about that.
And I think we're just naturally curious.
So we make, this is my version of how we work.
We make up stories and explanations.
And where there are two things
which I think are just true of being human.
We make judgments fast because we have to.
Where to survive, is that a tiger or is that not a tiger?
And we go.
Act.
We have to act fast and incomplete information.
So we judge quickly and we're often wrong.
We're at least sometimes wrong,
which is all I need for this.
We're often wrong.
So we fool ourselves and we fool other people readily.
And so there's lots of stories that get told
and some of them result in a concrete benefit
and some of them don't.
So you said we're often wrong,
but what does it mean to be right?
Right, that's an excellent question to be right.
Well, since I believe that there is a real world,
I believe that to be, you can challenge me on this
if you're not a realist.
A realist is somebody who believes
in this real objective world,
which is independent of our perception.
If I'm a realist, I think that to be right
is to come closer.
I think, first of all, there's a relative scale.
There's not right and wrong.
There's right or more right and less right.
And you're more right if you come closer
to an exact true description of that real world.
Now, can we know that for sure?
No.
And the scientific method is ultimately
what allows us to get a sense
of how close we're getting to that real world.
No on two counts.
First of all, I don't believe it's a scientific method.
I was very influenced when I was in graduate school
by the writings of Paul Firehub
and who was an important philosopher of science
who argued that there isn't a scientific method.
There is or there is?
There is not.
There's not.
Can you elaborate, sorry if you were going to,
but can you elaborate on the,
what does it mean for there not to be a scientific method,
this notion that I think a lot of people believe in
in this day and age?
Sure.
Paul Firehub, he was a student of Popper
who taught Carl Popper and Firehub and argued
both by logic and by historical example
that you name anything that should be part of
the practice of science.
Say you should always make sure
that your theories agree with all the data
that's already been taken.
And he'll prove to you that there have to be times
when science contradicts, when some scientist
contradicts that advice
for science to progress overall.
So it's not a simple matter.
I think that, I think of science as a community
and of people.
Of people and as a community of people bound
by certain ethical precepts, precepts, whatever that is.
So in that community, a set of ideas they operate under.
I'm meaning ethically of kind of the rules
of the game they operate under.
Don't lie, report all your results,
whether they agree or don't agree with your hypothesis.
Check, the training of a scientist
mostly consists of methods of checking
because again, we make lots of mistakes.
We're very error prone, but there are tools
both on the mathematics side and the experimental side
to check and double check and triple check.
And a scientist goes through a training
and I think this is part of it.
You can't just walk off the street and say,
yo, I'm a scientist, you have to go through the training.
And the training, the test that lets you be done
with the training is can you form a convincing case
for something that your colleagues
will not be able to shout down
because the last, did you check this
and did you check that and did you check this
and what about a seeming contradiction with this?
And you've got to have answers to all those things
or you don't get taken seriously.
And when you get to the point where you can produce
that kind of defense and argument,
then they give you a PhD and you're kind of licensed.
You're still gonna be questioned
and you still may propose or publish mistakes,
but the community is gonna have to waste less time
fixing your mistakes.
Yes, but if you can maybe linger on it a little longer,
what's the gap between the thing that that community does
and the ideal of the scientific method?
The scientific method is you should be able
to repeat and experiment.
There's a lot of elements to what the scientific method,
but the final result, the hope of it
is that you should be able to say with some confidence
that a particular thing is close to the truth.
Right, but there's not a simple relationship
between experiment and hypothesis or theory.
For example, Galileo did this experiment
of dropping a ball from the top of a tower
and it falls right at the base of the tower.
And Aristotelian would say, wow,
of course it falls right to the base of the tower.
That shows that the earth isn't moving
while the ball is falling.
And Galileo says, no weight is a principle of inertia
and has an inertia in the direction
with the earth isn't moving
and the tower and the ball and the earth all move together.
When the principle of inertia tells you at the bottom,
it does look at, therefore, my principle of inertia is right.
And Aristotelian says, no,
our style of science is right, the earth is stationary.
And so you've got to get an interconnected bunch of cases
and work hard to line up and explain.
It took centuries to make the transition
from Aristotelian physics to the new physics.
It wasn't done till Newton in 1680 something, 1687.
So what do you think is the nature of the process
that seems to lead to progress?
If we at least look at the long arc of science
of all the community of scientists,
they seem to do a better job of coming up with ideas
that engineers can then take on and build rockets with
or build computers with or build cool stuff with.
I don't know, a better job than what?
Than this previous century.
So century by century, we'll talk about strength theory
and so on and kind of possible,
when you might think of us dead ends and so on.
Which is not the way I think of strength theory.
We'll straighten out, we'll get our strength straight.
But there is nevertheless in science,
very often at least temporary dead ends.
But if you look at the through centuries,
you know, the century before Newton
and the century after Newton,
it seems like a lot of ideas came closer to the truth
that then could be usable by our civilization
to build the iPhone, right?
To build cool things that improve our quality of life.
That's the progress I'm kind of referring to.
Let me, can I say that more precisely?
Yes.
It's a low bar.
I think it's important to get the time, place is right.
There was a scientific revolution
that partly succeeded between about 1900 or late 1890s
and into the 1930s, 1940s and maybe some
if you stretch it into the 1970s.
And the technology, this was the discovery of relativity
and that included a lot of developments
of electromagnetism.
The confirmation which wasn't really well confirmed
into the 20th century that matter was made of atoms
and the whole picture of nuclei
with electrons going around
and this is early 20th century.
And then quantum mechanics was from 1905.
It took a long time to develop to the late 1920s.
And then it was basically in final form.
And the basis of this partial revolution
and we can come back to why it's only a partial revolution
is the basis of the technologies you mentioned.
All of, I mean, electrical technology
was being developed slowly with this.
And in fact, there's a close relation
between development of electricity
and the electrification of cities in the United States
and Europe and so forth and the development of the science.
The fundamental physics since the early 1970s
doesn't have a story like that so far.
There's not a series of triumphs and progresses
and there's not any practical application.
So just to linger briefly on the early 20th century
and the revolutions in science that happened there.
What was the method by which the scientific community
kept each other in check about
when you get something right, when you get something wrong?
Is experimental validation ultimately the final test?
It's absolutely necessary.
And the key things were all validated.
The key predictions of quantum mechanics
and of the theory of electricity and magnetism.
So before we talk about Einstein,
your new book, before string theory,
quantum mechanics and so on,
let's take a step back at a higher level question.
What is that you mentioned?
What is realism?
What is anti realism?
And maybe why do you find realism
as you mentioned so compelling?
Well, realism is the belief in an external world
independent of our existence, our perception,
our belief, our knowledge.
A realist as a physicist is somebody who believes
that there should be possible some completely objective
description of each and every process
at the fundamental level,
which describes and explains exactly what happens
and why it happens.
That kind of implies that that system
in a realist view is deterministic,
meaning there's no fuzzy magic going on
that you can never get to the bottom.
You can get to the bottom of anything
and perfectly describe it.
Some people would say that I'm not that interested
in determinism, but I could live with
the fundamental world which had some chance in it.
So you said you could live with it,
but do you think God plays dice in our universe?
I think it's probably much worse than that.
In which direction?
I think that theories can change
and theories can change without warning.
I think the future is open.
You mean the fundamental laws of physics can change?
Yeah.
Okay, we'll get there.
I thought we would be able to find some solid ground,
but apparently the entirety of it,
temporarily so, probably.
Okay, so realism is the idea that
while the ground is solid, you can describe it.
What's the role of the human being,
our beautiful complex human mind in realism?
Are we just another set of molecules
connected together in a clever way,
or the observer, does the observer,
our human mind, consciousness, have a role in this
realism view of the physical universe?
There's two questions you could be asking.
Does our conscious mind, do our perceptions
play a role in making things become,
in making things real or things becoming?
That's question one.
Question two is, does this,
we can call it a naturalist view of the world
that is based on realism,
allow a place to understand the existence of
and the nature of perceptions and consciousness in mind?
And that's question two.
Question two, I do think a lot about,
and my answer, which is not an answer,
is I hope so, but it certainly doesn't yet.
Question one, I don't think so.
But of course, the answer to question one
depends on question two.
So I'm not up to question one yet.
So question two is the thing that you can kind of
struggle with at this time.
What about the anti realists?
So what flavor, what are the differences
in the flavor?
What are the different camps of anti realists
that you've talked about?
I think it would be nice if you can articulate
for the people for whom there is not a very concrete
real world, if there's divisions or there's a,
it's messier than the realist view of the universe.
What are the different camps?
What are the different views?
I'm not sure, I'm a good scholar
and can talk about the different camps
and analyze it.
Many of the inventors of quantum physics
were not realists, were anti realists.
They lived in a very perilous time
between the two world wars
and there were a lot of trends in culture
which were going that way.
But in any case, they said things like
the purpose of science is not to give
an objective realist description of nature
as it would be in our absence.
This might be saying Niels Bohr,
the purpose of science is as an extension
of our conversations with each other
to describe our interactions with nature
and we're free to invent and use terms
like particle or wave or causality
or time or space.
If they're useful to us
and they carry some intuitive implication
but we shouldn't believe that they actually
have to do with what nature would be like
in our absence, which we have nothing to say about.
Do you find any aspect of that?
Because you kind of said that we human beings
tell stories.
Do you find aspects of that kind of
anti realist view of Niels Bohr compelling
that we're fundamentally our storytellers
and then we create tools of space and time
and causality and whatever this fun quantum
mechanic stuff is to help us tell the story
of our world?
Sure, I just would like to believe that
it is an aspiration for the other thing.
The other thing being what?
The realist point of view.
Do you hope that the stories will eventually
lead us to discovering the real world as it is?
Yeah.
It's perfection possible by the way, is it?
No.
You mean will we ever get there and know that we're there?
Yeah, exactly.
That's for people 5,000 years in the future.
We're certainly nowhere near there yet.
Do you think reality that exists outside of our mind,
do you think there's a limit to our cognitive abilities,
again the sentence of apes for just biological systems,
is there a limit to our mind's capability
to actually understand reality?
There comes a point even with the help of the
tools of physics that we just cannot grasp
some fundamental aspects of that reality.
Again, I think that's a question for 5,000 years in the future.
We're not even close to that limit.
I think there is a universality.
Here, I don't agree with David Deutsch about everything,
but I admire the way he put things in his last book
and he talked about the role of explanation
and he talked about the universality
of certain languages or the universality of mathematics
or of computing and so forth.
He believed that universality, which is something real,
which somehow comes out of the fact that a symbolic system
or a mathematical system can refer to itself
and can, I forget what that's called,
can reference back to itself.
And build in which he argued for a universality
of possibility for our understanding, whatever is out there.
I admire that argument, but it seems to me
we're doing okay so far, but we'll have to see.
Whether there is a limit or not,
for now we've got plenty to play with.
There are things which are right there in front of us.
Which we miss.
And I'll quote my friend, Derek Weinstein,
in saying, look, Einstein carried his luggage.
Freud carried his luggage.
Marx carried his luggage.
Martha Graham carried her luggage.
Et cetera.
Edison carried his luggage.
All these geniuses carried their luggage.
Not once before, relatively recently,
did it occur to anybody to put a wheel on luggage and pull it.
And it was right there waiting to be invented for centuries.
So this is Eric Weinstein.
Yeah.
What do the wheels represent?
Are you basically saying that there's stuff right in front of our eyes
that once it just clicks, we put the wheels in the luggage,
a lot of things will fall into place?
Yes, I do.
And every day I wake up and think,
why can't I be that guy who was walking through the airport?
What do you think it takes to be that guy?
Because, like you said,
a lot of really smart people carry their luggage.
What, just psychologically speaking,
so Eric Weinstein is a good example of a person who thinks outside the box.
Yes.
Who resists almost conventional thinking.
You're an example of a person who, by habit, by psychology,
by upbringing, I don't know,
but resists conventional thinking as well, just by nature.
Thank you.
That's a compliment.
That's a compliment? Good.
So what do you think it takes to do that?
Is that something you were just born with?
I doubt it.
Well, from my studying some cases,
because I'm curious about that, obviously.
And just in a more concrete way,
when I started out in physics,
because I started a long way from physics,
so it took me a long, not a long time,
but a lot of work to get to study it and get into it.
So I did wonder about that.
And so I read the biographies,
and in fact, I started with the autobiography of Weinstein
and Newton and Galileo and all those people.
And I think there's a couple of things.
Some of it is luck being in the right place at the right time.
Some of it is stubbornness and arrogance,
which can easily go wrong.
And I know all of these are doorways.
If you go through them slightly at the wrong speed
or in the wrong angle, there are ways to fail.
But if you somehow have the right luck,
the right confidence and arrogance,
caring.
I think Weinstein cared to understand nature
with a ferocity and a commitment
that exceeded other people of his time.
So he asked more stubborn questions.
He asked deeper questions.
I think, and there's a level of ability
and whether ability is born in
or can be developed to the extent to which it can be developed,
like any of these things, like musical talent.
You mentioned ego.
What's the role of ego in that process?
Confidence.
But in your own life,
have you found yourself walking that nice edge of too much
or too little, so being overconfident
and therefore leaning yourself astray
or not sufficiently confident to throw away
the conventional thinking of whatever the theory of the day,
of theoretical physics?
I don't know if...
I mean, I've contributed what I've contributed,
whether if I had had more confidence in something,
I would have gotten further.
I don't know.
Certainly, I'm sitting here at this moment
with very much my own approach to nearly everything.
When I'm calm, I'm happy about that.
But on the other hand, I know people
whose self confidence vastly exceeds mine
and sometimes I think it's justified
and sometimes I think it's not justified.
Your most recent book titled,
Einstein's Unfinished Revolution.
So I have to ask,
what is Einstein's Unfinished Revolution
and also how do we finish it?
Well, that's something I've been trying to do my whole life.
But Einstein's Unfinished Revolution
is the twin revolutions which invented relativity theories,
special and especially general relativity,
and quantum theory,
which he was the first person to realize in 1905
that there would have to be a radically different theory
which somehow realized or resolved the paradox
of duality of particle and wave for photons.
People, I think, don't always associate Einstein
with quantum mechanics
because I think his connection with it,
as one of the founders, I would say, of quantum mechanics,
he kind of put it in the closet.
Well, he didn't believe that the quantum mechanics,
as it was developed in the mid to late 1920s,
was completely correct.
At first, he didn't believe it at all.
Then he was convinced that it's consistent but incomplete
and that also is my view.
It needs, for various reasons,
I can elucidate,
to have additional degrees of freedom,
particles, forces, something
to reach the stage where it gives a complete description
of each phenomenon as I was saying,
realism, demands.
So what aspect of quantum mechanics
bothers you and Einstein the most?
Is it some aspect of the wave function
collapse discussions, the measurement problem?
Is it the...
The measurement problem.
I'm not going to speak for Einstein.
The measurement problem, basically,
and the fact that...
What is the measurement problem, sorry?
The basic formulation of quantum mechanics
gives you two ways to evolve situations and time.
One of them is explicitly when no observer is observing
or no measurement is taking place.
And the other is when a measurement or an observation
is taking place.
They basically contradict each other.
But there's another reason why the revolution wasn't complete,
which is we don't understand the relationship
between these two parts.
The general relativity, which became our best theory
of space and time and gravitation and cosmology
and quantum theory.
So for the most part,
general relativity describes big things.
Quantum theory describes little things.
And that's the revolution that we found.
Really powerful tools to describe big things and little things.
And it's unfinished because
we have two totally separate things.
We need to figure out how to connect them so we can describe everything.
Right. And we either do that
if we believe quantum mechanics, as understood now,
is correct by bringing general relativity
or some extension of general relativity
that describes gravity and so forth
into the quantum domain that's called quantize.
The theory of gravity.
Or if you believe with Einstein
that quantum mechanics needs to be completed.
And this is my view.
Then part of the job of finding the right completion
or extension of quantum mechanics
would be one that incorporated space time and gravity.
So where do we begin?
So first, let me ask,
perhaps you can give me a chance
if I could ask you some just really basic questions.
Well, they're not at all.
The basic questions are the hardest,
you mentioned space time.
What is space time?
Space time, you talked about a construction.
So I believe the space time
is an intellectual construction
that we make of the events in the universe.
I believe the events are real
and the relationships between the events
which cause which are real.
But the idea that there's a four dimensional
smooth geometry which has a metric
and a connection and satisfies
the equations that Einstein wrote.
It's a good description to some scale.
It's a good approximation.
It captures some of what's really going on in nature.
But I don't believe it for a minute is fundamental.
So okay, we're going to allow me to link around that.
So the universe has events.
Events cause other events.
This is the idea of causality.
Okay, so that's real.
That's in my...
In your view, Israel.
Or hypothesis or the theories
that I have been working to develop
make that assumption.
So space time, you said four dimensional space
is kind of the location of things
and time is whatever the heck time is.
And you're saying that space time
is both space and time are emergent
and not fundamental.
Before you correct me,
what does it mean to be fundamental or emergent?
Fundamental means it's part of the description
as far down as you go.
We have this notion.
As real as real it could be.
So I think the time is fundamental
and quote goes all the way down
and space does not.
And the combination of them
we use in general relativity that we call space time
also does not.
But what is time then?
I think that time,
the activity of time
is the continual creation of events
from existing events.
So if there's no events, there's no time.
Then there's not only no time, there's no nothing.
So I believe the universe
has a history
which goes to the past.
I believe the future does not exist.
There's a notion of a present and a notion of the past.
And the past consists of
is a story about events that took place
to our past.
So you said the future doesn't exist.
Yes.
Could you say that again?
Can you try to
give me a chance to understand that one more time?
So the events cause other events.
What is this universe?
Because we'll talk about locality
and nonlocality.
Good.
Because it's a crazy, I mean it's not crazy,
it's a beautiful set of ideas
that you propose.
And if causality is fundamental
I'd just like to understand it better.
What is the past?
What is the future?
What is the flow of time?
Even the error of time
in our universe, in your view.
And maybe what's an event?
Oh, an event is where
something changes.
Or where
to...
It's hard to say
because it's a primitive concept.
An event is
a moment of time
within space.
This is the view in general relativity
where two particles intersect
in their paths
or something changes
in the path of a particle.
Now, we are
postulating that there is
at the fundamental level a notion
which is an elementary notion
so it doesn't have
a definition in terms of other things
but it is something elementary
happening.
And it doesn't have a connection to energy
or matter or exchange of energy?
Because it's at that level.
Yes, it involves
and that's why the version of
a theory of
events that I've developed
with Marina Cortez.
And by the way, I want to mention
my collaborators because they've been
at least as important in this work as I have.
There's Marina Cortez
in all the work since about
2013, 2012,
2013 about
causality, causal sets
in the period before that, Roberta
Mangibara Anga
who is a philosopher and a professor
of law.
And that's in your efforts together
with your collaborators to finish the unfinished revolution
and focus on causality
as a fundamental
as fundamental to physics.
So
And there's certainly other people
we've worked with but those two people's
thinking had a huge influence
on my own thinking.
That's why you describe causality.
That's what you mean of time being fundamental.
That causality is fundamental.
Yes.
And what does it mean for space
to not be fundamental?
That's very good.
There's a level of description
in which there are events
there are
events create other events
but there's no space.
They don't live in space.
They have an order in which they caused each other
and that is part
of the nature of time for us.
So
But there is an emergent
approximate description
and you asked me to find an emergent.
I didn't.
An emergent
property is a property
that arises
at some level of complexity
larger than
and more complex than the fundamental level
which requires
some property
to describe it
which is not directly
explicable
or derivable is the word I want
from the properties of the fundamental
things.
And space is one of those things
in a sufficiently complex
universe space
three dimensional
position of things emerged.
Yes and we have this
we saw how this happens
in detail in some models
both computationally
and analytically.
Okay so connected to space
is the idea of locality.
Yes.
So we talked about realism.
So I
live in this world that like sports
locality is a thing that
you can affect things close to you
and don't have an effect
on things that are far away.
It's a thing that bothers me about gravity
in general or action
at a distance.
Same thing that probably bothered Newton
or at least he said a little bit
about it.
Okay so what do you think about locality
is it just a construct
is it us humans
just like this idea
and are connected to it because we exist
and we need it for our survival
but it's not fundamental.
I mean it seems crazy for it not to be a fundamental
aspect of our reality.
It does.
Can you comfort me on a sort of as a therapist
like how do I
I'm not a good therapist.
I'll do my best.
There are several different definitions
of locality when you come
to talk about locality in physics
in
quantum field theory
which is a mixture
of special relativity
and quantum mechanics.
There is a precise definition
of locality.
Field operators
corresponding to events in space time
which are space like separated
commute with each other as operators.
So in quantum mechanics
you think about the nature realities
fields and things that are close
in a field have an impact
on each other more
than farther away.
That's very comforting.
That makes sense.
So that's a property of quantum field theory
and it's well tested.
Unfortunately there's another definition
of local
which was expressed by Einstein
and expressed more precisely
by John Bell
which has been tested experimentally
and found to fail.
And this setup
is you take two particles
so one thing
that's really weird about quantum mechanics
is a property called entanglement.
You can have two particles
interact and then share
a property
without being a property of either one
of the two particles.
And if you take such a system
and then
you make a measurement
on particle A
which is over here on my right side
and particle B
and somebody else makes a measurement
on particle B
you can ask
that whatever is
the real reality of particle B
it not be affected
by the choice
the observer at particle A
makes about what to measure. Not the outcome
just the choice of the different
things they might measure.
And that's a notion of locality
because it assumes that these things
are very far spaced like separated
and it's going to take a while
for any information
about the choice made by the people here at A
to affect the reality at B
but you make that assumption
that's called bell locality
and you derive a certain inequality
that some
correlations, functions of correlations
have to satisfy.
And then you can test that
pretty directly
in experiments which create pairs
of photons or other particles
and it's wrong by many
sigma.
In experiment it doesn't match.
What does that mean?
That means that that definition
of locality I stated is false.
The one that Einstein
was playing with?
The one that I stated that is
it's not true that
whatever is real about particle B
is unaffected
by the choice that the observer makes
as to what to measure in particle A.
No matter how long they've been
propagating at almost the speed of light
or the speed of light
away from each other.
No matter, so like the distance between them?
Well, it's been tested of course
if you want to have hope
for quantum mechanics
being incomplete or wrong
and corrected by something that changes this.
It's been tested over
a number of kilometers.
I don't remember
whether it's 25 kilometers
or 170 kilometers.
So
in trying to solve the
unsolved revolution
in trying to come up with the theory of everything
is
causality, fundamental
and
breaking away from locality?
Absolutely.
A crucial step.
In your book essentially those are the
two things we really need to
think about as a community.
Especially the physics community has to think about
this.
I guess my question is
how do we solve
how do we finish the unfinished
revolution?
Well, that's...
I can only tell you what I'm trying to do
and what I've abandoned
as not working.
As one ant, smart ant
and an ant colony?
Yep.
Or maybe dumb, that's why.
But anyway,
my view of the
we've had some nice
theories invented.
There's a bunch
of different ones.
Both relate to quantum mechanics
relate to quantum gravity.
There's a lot to admire
in many of these different approaches.
But to my
understanding they
none of them completely
solve the problems that I care about.
And
so we're in a situation
which
is either terrifying for a student
or full of opportunity for the right
student in which we've got
more than a dozen
attempts.
And I never thought, I don't think anybody
anticipated would work out this way.
Which work partly and then at some point
they have an issue
that nobody can figure out how to go around
or how to solve.
And
that's the situation we're in.
My reaction to that
is two folks.
One of them is to try to
bring people, we evolved
into this unfortunate
sociological situation in which there are
communities around some
of these approaches. And to borrow
again a metaphor from Eric
they sit on top of hills
in the landscape of theories
and throw rocks at each other.
And as Eric says
we need two things. We need people
to get off their hills
and come down into the valleys
and party and talk
and become friendly and
learn to say
not no but
but yes and
yes, your idea goes this far
but maybe if we put it together with my idea
we can go further.
Yes.
So in that spirit
I've talked
several times with Sean Carroll
who's also written
an excellent book recently
and he plays around
as a big fan of the many worlds interpretation
of quantum mechanics.
So I'm a troublemaker
so let me ask
what's your sense of
Sean and the idea of many worlds interpretation?
I've read many
the commentary back and forth
you guys are friendly
but have a lot of fun debating.
I love Sean and
he, no, I really
he's
not, he's articulate
and he's a great representative
or ambassador of science
to the public
for different fields of science to each other.
He also
like I do takes philosophy
seriously
and
unlike what I do
in all cases he's really done the homework.
He's read a lot
he knows the people
he talks to them
he exposes his arguments to them
and I
there's this mysterious thing
that we so often end up
on the opposite sides of these issues.
It's fun though.
It's fun and
I'd love to have a conversation
about that but I would want to include him.
I see about many worlds
No, I can tell you what I think about many worlds.
I'd love to but actually on that let me pause
Sean has a podcast
you should definitely figure out how to talk to Sean.
I actually told Sean
I would love to hear you guys just going back and forth
so
I hope you can make that happen eventually
you and Sean. I want to tell you what it is
but there's something that Sean said to me
in June of 2016
that changed
my whole approach to a problem
but I have to tell him first.
That will be great
to tell him on his podcast.
I can't invite myself to his podcast
I told him.
We'll make it happen.
So many worlds.
What's your view?
We talked about non locality.
Many worlds is also a very
uncomfortable idea
or beautiful depending
on your perspective.
It's
very nice
because
there's a realist aspect to it
I think you called it magical realist
it's just a beautiful line
but
at the same time it's very difficult to
far limit a human mind to comprehend
so what are your thoughts about it?
Let me start
with the easy and obvious
and then go to the scientific
it doesn't appeal to me
it doesn't answer the questions
I want answered
and it does so to such a
strong case that when Roberto
Mangibar Anger and I
began looking for principles
and I want to come back and talk about the use of principles
in science because that's the other thing
I was going to say and I don't want to lose that
when we started looking for principles
we made our first principle
there is just one world
and it happens once
but
it's
not helpful to my
personal approach to my personal
agenda but of course
I'm part of a community
and
my sense of
the many worlds interpretation I have
thought a lot about it and struggled a lot
with it is
the following
first of all there's Everett himself
there's what's in Everett
and there are several
issues there
connected with the
derivation of the born rule
which is the rule that gives probabilities
to events
and the reasons why there is a
problem with probability
is that
I mentioned the two ways that
physical systems can evolve
the many worlds interpretation
cuts off one the one having
to do with measurement
and just has the other one the Schrodinger evolution
which is the smooth evolution
of the quantum state
but the notion of probability
is only in
the second rule which we've thrown away
so where does
probability come from and you have to answer the
question because
experimentalists use probabilities
to check the theory
now
at first
side you get very confused because there seems
to be a real problem
because in the many worlds interpretation
this talk about
branches is not quite precise but I'll
use it
there's a branch in which
everything that might happen does
happen with probability one
in that branch
you might think you could count the
number of branches
in which things do and don't happen
and get numbers that
you can define as something like
frequentist probabilities
and
ever did have an argument in that direction
but
the argument gets very subtle when
there are an infinite number of possibilities
as is the case in most quantum
systems and my
understanding although
I'm not as much of an expert as some other
people is that ever
its own proposal
failed did not work
there are then
if it doesn't stop there
there is
an important idea that ever
didn't know about which is decoherence
and it is a phenomenon that
might be very much relevant
and so
a number of people
post everett have
tried to make versions of what you
might call many worlds quantum mechanics
and this
is a big area and it's subtle
and it's not the kind of thing that
I do well
that's why there's two chapters
on this in the book I wrote
chapter 10 which is about everett's version
chapter 11
there's a very good group
of philosophers of physics in oxford
simon saunders
david walis
harvey brown
and a number of others and of course
there's david deutch
who is there
and those people have developed
and put a lot of work
into a very sophisticated
set of ideas designed to come back
and answer that question
they have the flavor of
there are really no probabilities
we admit that but imagine
if the everett story was true
and you were living in that
multiverse how would you make
bets and so
they use
decision theory from the theory
of probability and gambling and so forth
to shape a story
of how
you would bet if you were
inside an everett in the universe
and you knew that
and there's a debate
among those experts
as to whether
they or somebody else has really
succeeded
and when I checked in
as I was finishing the book with some of those
people like simon who's a good friend
of mine
they told me
that they weren't sure that any of them
was yet correct
so that's what I put in my book
now to add to that
shawn has his own
approach to that problem in what's called
self referencing or self locating
observers
and
it doesn't
I tried to read it
and it didn't make sense to me
but I didn't study it hard
I didn't communicate with shawn
I didn't do the things that I would do
so I had nothing to say about in the book
I don't know
whether it's right or not
let's talk a little bit about
science you mentioned
the use of principles in science
what does it mean
to have a principle and
why is that important
when I feel very frustrated
about quantum gravity I like to go back
and read history
and of course
Einstein's achievements are
a huge lesson
and hopefully
something like a role model and it's very clear
that Einstein
thought that the first job
when you want to
enter a new domain of theoretical
physics is to discover and invent
principles
and then make models of how those
principles might be applied in some
experimental situation
where the mathematics comes in
so for Einstein
there was no
unified space and time
Minkowski invented this idea of
space time
for Einstein it was a model of his
principles or his postulates
and I've
taken the view
that we don't know
the principles of quantum gravity
I can think about
candidates and I have some papers where I
discuss different
candidates and I'm happy to discuss them
but my
belief now is that
those partially successful approaches
are all
models
which might describe
indeed some quantum gravity
physics in some domain in some
aspect but
ultimately
would be important because they
model the principles and
the first job is to tie down those
principles so that's the approach
that I'm taking
so speaking of principles
in your 2006 book
The Trouble with Physics
you
criticized a bit string theory
for taking us away from the
rigors of the scientific method
or whatever you would call it but
what's
the trouble with physics
today and how do we fix it
can I say
how I read that book
and I'm not
this of course has to be
my fault because
you can't as an author claim
after all the work you put in that you are
misread
but I will
say that many of the reviewers
who are not
personally involved and even many
who were working on string theory
some other approach to quantum gravity
told me, communicated with me
and told me they thought that I was
fair and
balance was the word
that was usually used so let me tell you
what my purpose was in writing that
book which clearly
got diverted by
because there was already
a rather hot argument
going on and this is
on which topic on string theory specifically
or in general in physics
no
more specifically than string theory
so
since we're in Cambridge can I say that
we're doing this in Cambridge
just to be clear, Massachusetts
and
on Harvard campus
right so
Andy Strominger
is a good friend of mine and has been
for many many years
and Andy
so originally
there was this beautiful idea
that there were five string theories
and maybe they would be unified into one
and we would discover
a way to break that
symmetries of one of those string
theories and discover the standard
model and predict
all the properties of standard model particles
like their masses and charges
and so forth, coupling constant
and then there was a bunch
of solutions
to string theory found which led
each of them to a different version
of particle physics with a different phenomenology
these are called
the Chalabi Yao
metaphors named after
Yao who was also here
not
certainly we've been friends at some time in the past
anyway
and then there were nobody was sure
but hundreds of thousands of different
versions of string theory
and then Andy
found there was a way to put a certain kind
of mathematical curvature called
torsion
into the solutions and he wrote a paper
of string theory with torsion
in which he discovered there was
not formally
uncountable but he was unable to invent
any way to count
the number of solutions or classify
the diverse solutions
and he wrote that this is
worrying
doing phenomenology the old fashioned way
by solving the theory
is not going to work because
there's going to be
loads of solutions for editing
proposed phenomenology for anything
of the experiments
it hasn't quite worked out that way
but nonetheless he took
that worry to me
we spoke at least once
maybe two or three times about that
and I got seriously
worried about that
and this is a little
sounds like an anecdote that
inspired your worry
about string theory in general
well I tried to solve the problem
and I tried to solve the problem
I was reading
at that time a lot of biology
a lot of evolutionary theory like
Lindmerg Gullis and
Steve Gould and so
forth and
I
could take your time to go through
things but it occurred to me maybe
physics was like evolutionary biology
and maybe the laws
evolved and there was
the biologists talk about a landscape
a fitness landscape
of
DNA sequences or protein
sequences or a species
or something like that
and I took their concept and the word
landscape from theoretical biology
and made a scenario about how the
physics as a whole
could evolve
to discover the
parameters of the standard model
and I'm happy to discuss that's called
cosmological natural selection
so the parameters
of the standard model so the laws
of physics are changing
this idea would say that
the laws of physics are changing
in some way
that echoes
that of natural selection or just
it adjusts in some way
towards some goal
yes and
I published that
I wrote the paper in
8 or 89 the paper was published
in 92
my first book in 1997 the life of the
cosmos was explicitly
about that
and I was very clear
that what was important
is that because
you would develop an ensemble
of universes but they were
related by descent
through natural selection
almost every
universe would share the property
that it was
its fitness was maximized
to some extent or at least close
to maximum and I could deduce
predictions that could be tested
from that
and I worked all
of that out and I compared it to the
happy principle where you weren't
able to make tests
or make falsifications all of this
was in the late 80s
and early 90s
that's a really compelling notion but
how does that help you arrive
I'm coming to where
the book came from
so
what got me
I worked on string theory
I also
worked on loop current gravity
and that was one of the inventors of loop current gravity
and because
of my
strong belief in some other principles
which led to this notion of wanting a quantum
theory of gravity to be what we call
relational or background
independent
I tried very hard to make
string theory background independent
and in an up developing a bunch of tools
which then could apply directly
to general relativity and that became loop current gravity
so the things were
very closely related and have always been
very closely related in my mind
the idea that there were two communities
one devoted to strings and one devoted
to loops is nuts and has always
been nuts
okay so
so anyway
there's this nuts community of loops and strings
that are all beautiful and compelling
and mathematically speaking
and what's the trouble with all that
why is that such a problem
so I was interested
in developing that notion of how science
works based on the community
and ethics that I told you about
and I wrote
a draft of a book about that
which had
several chapters on methodology
of science and it was
rather academically oriented
book and
those chapters were the first
part of the book the first third of it
and you can find their remnants
in what's now the last
part of
the trouble with physics and then I described
a number of test cases
case studies and one of them
which I knew was the search for
quantum gravity and string theory and so forth
and
I was unable to get that
book published
so somebody made
the suggestion of flipping it around
and starting with
the story of string theory which was already
controversial this was
2004, 2005
but
I was very careful
to
be detailed to
criticize
papers and not people you won't
find me criticizing individuals
you'll find me criticizing
certain writing but in any
case
here's what I regret
let me make a program
worthwhile
as far as I know
with the exception of not understanding
how large
the applications to condense matters
say of ADM CF
ADS CFT
would get I think
largely my
diagnosis of string theory
as it was then
has stood up since 2006
what I regret
is that
the same critique I was using
string theory as an example
and the same critique applies
to many other communities
in science and all of
including and this is what I regret
my own community that is a community
of people working on quantum gravity
outside string theory
but and I considered
saying that explicitly
but to say that explicitly since I'm
it's a small intimate community
I would be telling stories
and naming names of
and making a kind
of history that I have no right
to write so I stayed away
from that but was misunderstood
but if I may
ask is there a hopeful message
for theoretical physics
that we can take from that book
sort of that looks at the community
not just your own
work on now with causality
and nonlocality but just
broadly in understanding the fundamental
nature of our reality
what's your hope for the
21st century in physics
that we take?
What do we solve the problem?
We solve the
unfinished problem of Einstein's
that's certainly the thing
that I care about most
and hope for most
let me say one thing among the young
people that I work with
I hear very often
in sense
a total disinterest in these
arguments that we older scientists
have
and an interest in what each other is doing
and this is starting to appear
in conferences
where the young people interested
in quantum gravity make a
conference they invite loops
and strings and causal dynamical
triangulations and causal set people
and we're having
a conference like this next week
a small workshop
at perimeter and I guess I'm
out of tidiness and then in
the summer we're having a big
full on conference
which is just quantum gravity it's not strings
it's not loops but
the organizers and the speakers will be
from all the different communities
and this to me is very helpful
that the different ideas
are coming together?
At least people are expressing an interest
in that
It's a huge honor
talking to you Lee thanks so much
for your time today
Thanks for listening to this conversation
and thank you to our presenting sponsor
Cash App. Download it, use code
LEX Podcast
You'll get $10 and $10 will go to first
an organization that inspires and educates
young minds to become science
and technology innovators of tomorrow
If you enjoy this podcast
subscribe on YouTube, give it 5 stars
on Apple Podcast, follow on Spotify
support it on Patreon
also connect with me on Twitter
at Lex Freedman
and now let me leave you with some words
from Lee Smolin
One possibility is
God is nothing but
the power of the universe to organize
itself
Thanks for listening and hope to see you
next time